How To Install Docker On Ubuntu

Step 1: Update the system
The first step is to refresh the repositories. To do so, run the command:

$ sudo apt update

Step 2: Install dependencies
Some dependencies are needed for the installation to go along seamlessly. Therefore, run the following command to install them:

$ sudo apt install apt-transport-https curl gnupg-agent ca-certificates software-properties-common -y
Once the dependencies have been installed, proceed to the next step.

 

Step 3: Install Docker on Ubuntu 22.04
With the requirements installed, the next step is to install Docker. We will install the Docker Community Edition ( Docker  CE ) which is opensource and free to download and use.

To do so, we will add the GPGK key

$ curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo apt-key add -
Once added, add the Docker repository as follows.

NOTE:

Since Ubuntu 22.04 is yet to be officially released, add the repository for Ubuntu 20.04 Stable.

$ sudo add-apt-repository "deb [arch=amd64] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu focal stable"
With the GPG key and the repository added, run the following command to install Docker and associated packages.

$ sudo apt install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io -y
This installs Docker and all the additional packages, libraries, and dependencies required by Docker and associated packages.

Once the command runs successfully, consider adding the currently logged-in user to the docker group. This allows you to run docker without invoking sudo.

$ sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
$ newgrp docker
You can now run Docker commands as a regular user without any challenges.

Step 4: Confirm that Docker is installed
To verify that Docker is installed, run the command:

$ docker version
From the output, you can see that we have installed Docker 20.10 which is the latest version of Docker at the time of publishing this guide.

check-docker-version-ubuntu-22.04

Step 5: Manage Docker Service
By default, Docker autostarts upon installation. To verify this, run the command:

$ sudo systemctl status docker
check-running-status-of-docker-on-ubuntu-22.04

If, for any reason, Docker is not running, simply execute the following command:

$ sudo systemctl start docker
To enable Docker to start automatically every time on system startup, run the command:

$ sudo systemctl enable docker
To restart Docker  run:

$ sudo systemctl restart docker
 

Step 5: Test Docker
To give Docker a test run, we will pull a ‘hello-world’ image from Docker Hub. From the image, a container will be created that displays a ‘Hello world’ message on the terminal along with the steps of what just happened after the command was executed.

So, we will run the command:

$ docker run hello-world
docker-run-hello-world-ubuntu-22.04

To confirm the images on the system, run the command:

$ docker images
docker imagesAfter the container is created, it exits or stops automatically. You can still check stopped containers as shown.

$ docker ps -a
check-docker-containers-exited

Conclusion
And this wraps up our guide. In this guide, we walked you through the installation of Docker on Ubuntu 22.04.
